Political Science Major   |  Political Science Minor

General Distribution Requirement
All courses taught by faculty in the political science department count toward the general distribution requirement in the social sciences, except POLI 267, POLI 268, POLI 274,POLI 276,POLI 277, and POLI 278(all of which count as humanities distribution) and internships and preceptorships (POLI 624, POLI 634).
Topics courses that are taught by other faculty but cross-listed by Political Science fulfill the general distribution requirement of the offering department.General Education RequirementsCourses that meet the general education requirements in writing, quantitative thinking, internationalism and U.S. identities and differences will be posted on the Registrar's web page in advance of registration for each semester.Additional information regarding the general distribution requirement and the general education requirements can be found in the graduation requirements section of this catalog. Honors ProgramThe Political Science department particpates in the Honors Program. Eligibility requirements, application procedures and specific project expectations for the department are available from either the department office or the Academic Programs and Advising Office.

Interdisciplinary Programs: The political science department supports a number of interdisciplinary programs, including: American Studies, Asian Studies, Media and Cultural Studies, International Studies, Latin American Studies, Legal Studies, Environmental Studies, Women's, Gender, and Sexuality Studies, and Urban Studies. Consult both program and departmental advisors.Topics CoursesPOLI 194, POLI 294, POLI 394, POLI 494 Courses numbered 194, 294, 394, and 494 are Topics courses. These courses address current issues in contemporary political life or offer an experimental course which may later become part of the regular curriculum. For a list of offerings in any given year, consult the College website prior to registration. (4 credits)Independent StudyThe department offers independent study options in the form of tutorials, independent projects, internships, preceptorships and Honors independent projects. For more information contact the department and review the Curriculum section of the catalog.


Political Science Major
Major Requirements: A political science major consists of at least nine courses. The department strongly recommends that political science majors plan their programs so that they take courses above the introductory level in at least two of the four major sub-fields of political science-American Politics, Comparative Politics, International Relations, and Political Theory.
Not more than two courses taught by faculty outside the political science department will count towards fulfilling the nine-course minimum for the major. Exceptions: the research methods courses and relevant courses transferred from an accredited college or university.
Consult department advisor or chair. The requirements for a political science major include:1 Foundations Course: POLI 100 - Foundations of US Politics, POLI 120 - Foundations of International Politics, POLI 140 - Foundations of Comparative Politics, POLI 160 - Foundations of Political Theory;
1 Theory Course: POLI 160 - Foundations of Political Theory, POLI 260 - Contemporary Political Theory, POLI 261 - Feminist Political Theory, POLI 262 - American Political Thought, POLI 265 - Work, Wealth, Well-Being, POLI 267 - Liberal and Conservative Political Theory, POLI 278 - Marx, Religion, and Biopolitical Race, POLI 322 - Advanced International Theory; POLI 160 - Foundations of Political Theory may not be counted as both a Foundations and a Theory course. If counted as a Foundations course, an additional Theory course must be taken.
1 Research Methods Course: POLI 269 - Empirical Research Methods;POLI 272 - Persuasion and Political Change; SOCI 269 - Social Science Inquiry; SOCI 270 - Interpretive Social Research. In some cases, research methods courses taken in other social science disciplines may be used to fulfill this requirement following approval by the political science department chair. The department urges students to enroll in a research methods course before their junior year.
3 Intermediate-Level Courses (courses at the 200-level). Approved study away courses will count as intermediate courses.
1 Practicum (such as an internship, Chuck Green Fellowship course, service-learning course, action-research project, or similar experiential learning experience). The practicum requirement can be met with a non-credit bearing internship approved by the department chair. However, a major plan must still list no fewer than nine courses. Internships taken for less than 4 credits require a ninth course.
1 Advanced-Level Course (courses at the 300-level). A 300-level course taught by faculty outside the department will count as an intermediate course rather than an advanced course.
1 Capstone Experience: (POLI 400 - Senior Research Seminar or two semesters of POLI 404 - Honors Colloquium).

Political Science Minor
Minor RequirementsA political science minor consists of any five political science courses, normally including one foundation, one intermediate and one advanced level course. Four of these courses must be taught by the faculty in the political science department. Consult department advisor and chair.





